well let's now bring in Sultan Barakat
he's a professor of public policy at
hammad bin Khalifa University he joins
me again here in the studio Sultan thank
you for for joining me again thank you
now as we're seeing that the people as
well as Aid workers can a little more
freely move around and they can assess
the situation there on the ground in
Gaza we're seeing like the the full
extent of the destruction what's taken
place over over the last nearly two
months now does seeing that does that
change that the amount of pressure on
Israel it should uh ideally but I think
uh also Israel will try and work its way
out of this uh still and we could see
the beginning of this yesterday in
netanyahu's press conference with the
Belgium and the Spanish U Prime
Ministers when he tried to uh blame the
UN for not being fast enough responding
to the Palestinian needs he's only
agreed to the ceasefire you know two
days ago he expect the International
Community to come and help the
Palestinians as fast as possible now uh
what what I think he's trying to do is
is again confuse the picture overall as
to the situation uh we all uh witnessed
the way he uprooted more than a million
people yeah and this is still very much
in line with his bigger plan of uh
displacing the Palestinians out of Gaza
he's made all these people extremely
vulnerable by taking them off their
homes uh their infrastructure where they
where they
lived before and mov them into another
side of Gaza and they become pretty
fluid I mean there there are people that
can be moved at very short notice now
and then he threw them all into the lab
of the International Community and say
it's your responsibility now he's given
them a break ceasefire and he expects
people to come for their help so I think
the situation there is very is unlikely
to improve very quickly as a result of
these four days but uh also add adding
to that of course uh people on the
ground were not briefed on the details
of this agreement so they were not told
that they can't go back to their homes
in the Gaza City which still sealed off
as far as the Palestinians are concerned
no one can enter and that must have
caused a lot of confusion for those who
want to make sure that the relatives are
fine they want to revisit their homes
and so on uh and uh I think uh the the
the the fact that they have to do all of
this live these four days under the
overall threat of continuing the war
must be horrifying must be terrible
because you you can't plan you cannot do
anything except maybe buried their dead
yeah that they have been engaged in well
today is day two I mean there's there's
only two more days to go I'm wondering
what happens after the 4 days I mean
Israel's obviously been preparing for a
long War they've been very explicit
about that in Israel at the moment we've
been hearing from our correspondents
repeatedly that the military continues
to have very broad public support even
though that's not not necessarily shared
by Netanyahu but Netanyahu presumably
knows or or feels that he's pretty much
out as soon as the war ends so
everyone's incentivized to keep it going
yes well I think it would be slightly
more difficult for him to keep it going
now that people have tasted the
possibility of releasing their hostages
you know unharmed particular that
they've all now been checked and they
all look like they've been looked after
they've been protected and uh I mean
from what we've seen from ourside Clear
the Palestinians have exerted a lot of
effort to protect these people amongst
this huge bombing that was going on so I
think it would be much more difficult
for him to say no we're going to go back
to war and a lot can be uh maybe read in
in the nature of the hostages that are
to be released the waves that we saw
yesterday today and yesterday they're
really based on humanitarian women and
children the old women and children uh
even on the Palestinian side the ones
that were released from the Israeli
prison
none of them is really what we call high
value prisoner for Israel that is really
affecting its security they were all
part of the normal pattern of harassing
the Palestinians now I think when we
move into day three and four we'll
probably see on the list uh more
important names and then we can also
tell whether there is a real plan for
the future because depending on who
Israel releases from its presence so
someone like Marwan baruti if they
decide that he can be included in this
wave then clearly there is a prospect
for some political position in the
future well let me ask you then about
the releasing of more prisoners or on
one side captives on the other if Hamas
decides to release that the majority of
the captives I've been curious about how
that changes the calculus for the war
does that change the the appetite in
Israel for the war the rationale for
continuing the war the public support
for it and on the other side does Hamas
then then lose the The Leverage that
they they have I mean it's very unlikely
that Hamas now will uh talk about
releasing the soldiers they're holding
so they all the agreement now is focused
on civilians by and large but uh uh they
are looking for Israel to release high
value prisoners on from the prisons in
Israel uh would that uh lead them to
lose their leverage uh obviously it
there is part of that but I think now
with the international cons cons
consensus growing towards trying and
bring this to an end uh they're likely
to uh to continue well we'll see what
happens in the coming days and week
Sultan Barakat thank you for sharing
your thoughts and joining me again thank
you very much